# Intro

[<<Prev](../README.md)

## What is Java?

Java is a high level object oriented programming language. Source code is written using the Java programming language into plain text files (.*java* files) and then compiled into an intermediate form (.*class* files) called *bytecode*. The `java` program then runs the bytecode on an instance of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

Since the JVM is available for many different operating systems, the same bytecode can be run on every system where the JVM is supported. This makes Java a very portable language at the cost of a slight overhead from needing to run on the JVM.

## Hello World!

In Java, every program must begin with a class where the name matches the filename.

The following code must be in a file called `j01.java` so that it matches the name of the class.

```
//j01.java
public class j01 {
    public static void main(String[] args){
        System.out.println("Hello World!");
    }
}
```

To run this code, compile and execute:

```
❯ javac j01.java
❯ java j01
```

or simply:

```
❯ java j01.java
```

which ouputs:

```
Hello World!
```

The `main()` method is the entry point for the program and must always be declared as `public`, `static`, and `void` and take a `String[]` as a parameter.

The String array is used to hold command line arguments. The `public` keyword is an access specificier and controls the visibility of class members. `public` allows the member `main()` to be called directly from outside of `class j01`, in this case, by the JVM interpreter. `static` allows the member `main()` be used without having to create an instance of the `j01` class first and is necessary for `main()` to be called since the interpreter has not made an object for `j01` yet.

Leaving either `public` or `static` out is still legal Java code and will still compile successfully with `javac`. However, it will fail to execute correctly with a runtime error.

A class can be compiled without a `main()` method but the JVM will not be able to execute it unless it can find an entry point for the program. Attempting to run it will also result in a runtime error.

```
❯ java j01      
Error: Main method not found in class j01, please define the main method as:
   public static void main(String[] args)
or a JavaFX application class must extend javafx.application.Application

```

Next, a call is made to `println()` with a string parameter.

`System` is a class declared public final and contains standard input, output, and error streams. It contains an instance of `out` which is of type `PrintStream` and is declared public static final and gets initialized during startup of the program. Finally, `println()` is a method of `PrintStream` and writes to `out`.

[>>Next](02.md)