[<<Prev](01.md)

# Data Types

Data types fall into one of two categories: primitive or non-primitive.

## Primitive Data Types

Primitive data types are predefined data types in Java. They have predefined sizes and types of values.

There are eight primitive types in Java: byte, short, int. long, double, char, and boolean.

**byte** - 8 bit signed integer. Values range from -128 to 127.

**short** - 16 bit signed integer. Values range from -32,768 to 32,767

**int** - 32 bit signed integer. Values range from -2<sup>31</sup> to 2<sup>31</sup>-1

**long** - 64 bit signed integer. Values range from -2<sup>63</sup> to 2<sup>63</sup>-1

**float** - 32 bit signed floating point. Single precision

**double** - 64 bit signed floating point. Double precision

**boolean** - 1 bit unsigned boolean representation. Actual size in memory is JVM dependent. Values range from `true` to `false`

**char** - 16 bit unsigned unicode. Values range from '\u0000' to '\uffff' (0 to 65,535)

Primitive data types can be assigned literal values in many different ways and do not require a `new` keyword since they are not objects.

Primitive type variables store primitive values/literals.

### Integers

Integer type literals default to type `int`. Using a `L` or or `l` suffix will result in type `long`.

Values for types `byte`, `short`, `int`, and `long` can be created from `int` literals and so do not require a suffix. `long` types created from `int` literals that exceed `int` ranges must be created using  a `L` or or `l` suffix.

To create an integer literal using a different number system than decimal, a prefix must be used.

### Floating Points

By default, floating point literals default to type `double` unless it has a `F` or `f` suffix to specify type `float`.

Floating point types `float` and `double` can also be expressed using scientific notation using `E` or `e`.

### Characters

Literals of type `char` may be created from any Unicode character such as `'a'` or escaped Unicode code such as `'\u1a2b'` using single quotes.

Literals containing more than one `char` must be in double quotes and are `String` literals.

## Non-Primitive Data Types

Non-primitive types, also known as reference types, are data types such as arrays or classes.

Reference type variables store addresses, or references, to other data.

## Primitives vs. References

### Assignment

Assignment copies the contents of the RHS variable into the LHS variable.

For primitive variables, the primitive value is copied. For reference type variables, the address is copied.

This means that for reference type variables, the data is shared, not copied.

### Comparison

Compares the contents of a variable, for example, using the == operator.

For primitive variables, the primitive value is compared. For reference type variables, the addresses are compared.

### Parameter Usage

```
public void useprimitive(int i);  // i is the formal parameter

int count = 10;
useprimitive(count);  // count is the actual parameter
```

When passed as a parameter to a method, the contents of the *actual parameter* is copied into the *formal parameter*. This is also known as *pass by value*.

For primitive variables, the primitive value is copied. For reference type variables, the address is copied.

This means that changing the value of a formal primitive parameter does not change the actual parameter's value. Changing the address of a formal parameter does not change the actual parameter's address, but changing the formal parameter's object's data will change the actual parameter's.

### Return Values

Returning a value from a method will return a result to where the method was called.

For primitive types, the primitive value is returned. For reference types, the address is returned.

Since local variables and parameters are destroyed when the method is finished executing, objects can survive if they are returned and stored.

Run example using:

```
â¯ java j02.java
```

[>>Next](03.md)

